Cryptography 1 - History and Basics (#13)
csz-academy/csz.academy: _posts/2022-mm-dd-crypto-1/2022-mm-dd-crypto1-history-and-basics.markdown

* Computers kick-started modern cryptography, because suddenly it became very easy to perform complex operations very quickly. They also moved cryptography from being something that mostly military personnel and intelligence agencies were concerned with into the academic and public domain.
* The age of modern computing, with its ever-increasing amount of computational power (quantum computing, anyone?) poses new problems and threats to proven approaches.

"But where does he want to go with this?", you may want to ask. At this point, cryptography is something that concerns us all. It's in our phones, our banks, our computers and even in our refrigerators and ceiling lamps (hopefully). And I think it's important to understand what's going on. To a degree at least. And to understand where we stand and where we're going, we need to understand where we come from. If you take anything from this paragraph, let it be "the enemy knows the system" - never trust complexity as a security device.

> To answer the initial question posed in the alt title: cryptography is a means of ensuring that important information can only be accessed by people/parties you're comfortable sharing it with.

Reviewer: But cryptography is much more (Signatures/MACs do not provide confidentiality, they have "other goals").

I'd love to add a short section about Crypto**logy** in general, which can be seen as the field of Cryptography ("Defending primitives"), Cryptanalysis ("Attacking primitives") and maybe Protocols ("Combining Primitives").

Otherwise, it might get hart to justify the need for e.g. signatures or hash functions.

Author: Agreed - I just kinda felt like I'd already begun rambling in that part, so I wanted to wrap it up. But I share your thoughts, broadening the picture here might be better in the context of future content.

### Notation/Ground rules
Before we begin, we need to agree on a few things. The first of which is "how do we actually write this down?". To keep things consistent across two authors and a number of posts, we'll define the most important details right at the start.

#### Names
Examples in the realm of cryptography always rely on names to illustrate who is interacting with whom. The most commonly used names are:

**Alice**
Alice is our "person A". She either pens the original message that starts a (hopefully encrypted) conversation or is the one that states our general problem.

**Bob**
Similarly, Bob is "person B" and usually the one to interact with Alice.

**Eve**
Eve is the **e**vil attacker that tries to interject, manipulate, listen to, ... whatever it is Alice and Bob are discussing.

**Oscar**

> Oscar is our **o**pponent and, similar to Eve, tries to interfere with the communication between Alice and Bob. He might occasionally show up for the sake of flavour.

Reviewer: These are highly opinionated but this is how I've learned it:

 - Charlie is used as a third party for protocols (but neither Alice, Bob, or Charlie are necessarily trustworthy) 
 - Eve is an eavesdropper, i.e. she's only limited to passive attacks
 - Mallory is an attacker that can abuse malleability of ciphers (i.e. schoolbook RSA or CTR-Mode)
 - Oscar is (as you said) an opponent, used as a fallback if nothing else helps or as you said for flavour.

For a trusted third party, I've rarely seen names. I've also never seen names for distinguishers (useful for mathematical assumptions like the DDH-problem).

I don't know whether it might help to think about naming a bit more for the long run.

Author: I'm not against adding them, I again just wanted to keep things on the simpler side to not have endless lists of things. I'll give this some more thought.

We may at times need to introduce additional parties. For the sake of simplicity, all evil attackers will use names that start with an E and all opponents will start with an O. All other actors will draw from the remainder of the alphabet.

#### Notation
When talking about cryptography, especially when doing to in theory, there is not really a way around using math one way or another. We will try to focus on "concept first". This means that we'll introduce math as necessary, explaining new symbols as they come into play instead of building a giant glossary in this post. 

> > Mathematical notation/definitions will be put in quotes.

Reviewer: Notation in general should be placed in `\[` and `\]`, giving a standalone LaTeX-environment imho. For definitions, it's fine to place them in quotes imho.

Also, we'll sometimes use examples to illustrate our points. If we do, we'll follow these guidelines:

> * `Cryptographic Information (plain/cipher texts, keys, ...) is represented by inline code`. This applies to entire sentences as well as single letters and words.

Reviewer: Might be a bit cumbersome and I don't know if the LaTeX-implementation supports it, but I generally like putting cryptographic algorithms in `\textsc` and variables in `\mathsf`, giving a smallcaps resp. serif-free font.

I'd also prefer using LaTeX instead of code (using `\(` and `\)` for inline math), as it *will* get ugly for stuff like RSA (where you're having powers).

> * All examples will assume the standard latin alphabet of A to Z

Reviewer: Example for what? I don't get this sentence :D

* We'll use uppercase letters only

#### Glossary
There's a few words you'll regularly come across when talking about cryptography. The following list will also only provide a first set of basics and will most probably be expanded as we go along.
|word         |meaning                                                                                                          |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> |alphabet     |Set of characters (letters, numbers, symbols, ...) used to form texts. Need not be a conventional alphabet.      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|alphabet     |Set of characters (letters, numbers, symbols, ...) used to form texts. Not necessarily a conventional alphabet.      |
```

|plain text   |Original message, unencrypted and readable by anyone.                                                            |
|cipher (text)|Encrypted message, unintelligible and (hopefully) safe to pass on.                                               |
|key (word)   |Phrase or word used to start the encryption algorithm.                                                           |
|encrypting   |Using a cryptographic algorithm to convert plain text into a cipher.                                             |
|decrypting   |Using a cryptographic algorithm to recover the original plain text from a cipher.                                |
|attack       |Attempt to decrypt or modify a cipher text not intended for the attacker.                                        |

> |breaking     |Finding a way of quickly solving a cryptographic problem. May invalidate the security of an entire crypto system.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|breaking     |Finding a way of quickly solving a cryptographic problem or finding a different way to violate at least one goal of the cryptosystem.|
```

Now, with the preamble done, let's get to the matter at hand!

> ### What are crypto systems?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What are cryptosystems?
```

Cryptosystem is commonly written as one word, even though English has no compositing like German.

> Simply speaking, a crypto system is a category of cryptographic methods that follow the same basic principle. Crypto systems themselves usually belong to one of two categories: symmetric or asymmetric. Each crypto system has its own specific strengths and weaknesses and means of being attacked. Before we continue, we will formally define what a crypto system is in mathematical terms. Because as we go on, this is something we'll refer to a lot. So buckle up, this is going to be a bit of a read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply speaking, a cryptosystem is a collection of cryptographic methods that follow the same basic principle. Cryptosystems themselves usually belong to one of two categories: symmetric or asymmetric. Each cryptosystem has its own specific strengths and weaknesses and means of being attacked. Before we continue, we will formally define what a cryptosystem is in mathematical terms, because we'll refer to this a lot as we go on. So buckle up, this is going to be a bit of a read.
```

#### Definition: crypto system

> Mathematically speaking, a crypto system needs 5 components to be considered complete:
> 
> * A finite set of plain texts
> * A finite set of cipher texts
> * A finite set of cryptographic keys
> * A finite set of encryption rules using the above keys
> * A finite set of decryption rules using the above keys
> 
> A finite set simply means that the number of elements within the set cannot be infinite (- imagine them as a bag. You can only put in so many things before there's no space left). Usually, the above criteria are represented by symbols grouped into something called a tuple, so we don't have to write the entire list each time. For these posts we'll use the following symbols:

Reviewer: Key generation is also important to consider. For symmetric cryptography, it's often trivial, but it *needs* to be specified. You can't use a caesar-cipher key (Coming from `Z/nZ`) with AES (which requires keys in the form of `{0,1}^128`) and vice versa.

The sets also don't need to be finite. Look e.g. at any mode of operation for block ciphers, stream ciphers, or even better: Hash functions. They all have an infinite input set for plaintext and ciphertext (although there may be some attacks possible when e.g. a counter repeats, which will happen eventually as they're finite - not a direct problem for hash functions, but pigeonhole principle applies).

```suggestion
Mathematically speaking, a cryptosystem needs 6 components to be considered complete:

* A set of plain texts
* A set of cipher texts
* A set of cryptographic keys
* A key generation function (probabilistic) 
* A encryption function (either deterministic or probabilistic)
* A decryption function (deterministic)

Usually, the above criteria are represented by symbols grouped into something called a tuple, so we don't have to write the entire list each time. For these posts we'll use the following symbols:
```

I think it is also be important to cover whether the functions/algorithms are probabilistic or deterministic. This might become important "later-on", as a deterministic encryption function can never reach indistinguishability under chosen plaintext attacks (IND-CPA), at least as long as it doesn't keep any state.

> > * $\mathcal{P}$ to represent the plain texts
> > * $\mathcal{C}$ for the ciphers
> > * $\mathcal{K}$ for the keys
> > * $\mathcal{E}$ to sum up the encryption rules
> > * $\mathcal{D}$ for the decryption rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * $\mathcal{P}$ to represent the plain texts
> * $\mathcal{C}$ for the ciphers
> * $\mathcal{K}$ for the keys
> * $\mathsf{KGen}$ to sum up the key generation
> * $\mathsf{Enc}$ to sum up the encryption rules
> * $\mathsf{Dec}$ for the decryption rules
```

This is just a change following the notation that I prefer. Feel free to ignore.

And finally, to group them together we'll use brackets to represent them as a tuple:

> > $(\mathcal{P, C, K, E, D})$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> $(\mathcal{P, C, K},\mathsf{KGen, Enc, Dec})$
```

By the way, "tuple" tells you that all elements within the brackets always have to be written in that very order (we call this an "ordered list"). Tuples are also always finite.

To be a crypto system not just in name, there's one more rule we need to establish and that is how encryption and decryption work as mathematical functions. Using the above notation, the following must apply to any crypto system:
> * For every key $K \in \mathcal{K}$, there must be an encryption rule $e_k \in \mathcal{E}$ and a decryption rule $d_k \in \mathcal{D}$.
> * $e_k$ is defined as a function $e_k: \mathcal{P} \rightarrow \mathcal{C}$
> * $d_k$ is defined as a function $d_k: \mathcal{C} \rightarrow \mathcal{P}$
> * For all plaintexts $x \in \mathcal{P}$, $d_k(e_k(x)) = x$ must apply

> Let's break this down. What it basically says (in math terms) is that each key in the system must be made in a way that allows you to encrypt and decrypt with it. "Encryption" is a function that creates a cipher text out of a plain text, "decryption" goes the other way around and creates _a_ plain text from a cipher text. And to be useful for its intended purpose, applying a decryption function on a text that has been encrypted using an encryption function from the same crypto system _must_ restore the original plain text.

Reviewer: This property is also called "Correctness".

> The first requirement also introduces an important notation: $K \in \mathcal{K}$ tells us that any key that is held within $\mathcal{K}$ can be represented by the letter $K$. Likewise, plain texts ($P \in \mathcal{P}$) and cipher texts ($C \in \mathcal{C}$) can be generally represented using letters.

Reviewer: I just realized that you're targeting a different reader group than I've expected in the comments before :sweat_smile:

The last requirement can be implemented in one of two ways and usually makes the difference between what's called a "symmetrical" or an "asymmetrical" crypto system. Let's look at the definitions for these two.

#### Symmetrical crypto systems
A symmetrical crypto system is defined as a system where the same key that is used to encrypt the message also decrypts the cipher. This makes them pretty easy to use and fast, at a price. For example, you can't (or at least shouldn't) share the same key with multiple parties, unless you want to share information with all of them. And you'll most likely have to come up with new keys on a regular basis in a sort of arms race between you and Oscar/Eve. Because they will try to get hold of your current key. And if they ever do, a large portion of your communications will be visible for them.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe move the description of asymmetric crypto here, as I'd expect it when we "look at the definitions for these two".

Reviewer: Ah, makes sense later while reading.

Side note: you'll see why we start counting at `0` in the example below. It just makes life a little easier.

To decrypt the message, all your recipient has to do is subtract your key from the cipher text, and they'll end up with your original message. Coming back to the notation above, this means that
> $P$ is a plain text written in the standard latin alphabet (remember the guidelines from the beginning of this post).
> $C$ is a cipher text, also written in the latin alphabet
> $K$ is a number that specifies the shift (I'll dive into this in a bit)
> $e_k$ is shifting the alphabet by a number of steps defined by $K$
> $d_k$ is shifting the alphabet by a number of steps defined as $-K$ (to invert e_k)

Don't worry, we're almost there. One final problem presents itself. Assume you receive the following cipher text and a key of `5`: `HWDUYTLWFUMD`. Easy enough to do, you convert it into numbers and subtract `5`. But wait, `D` would be represented by `3`... wouldn't that make the original letter `-2`? This is where the final math part for today comes into play. A method called "modulo":

> > The latin alphabet can be represented by the modulo ring of $\mod{26}$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The latin alphabet can be represented by the integers modulo $\mod{26}$
```

Otherwise might be confusing if someone finds the concept of modules (which is related to rings). Wiki also calls it "Ring of integers modulo n" https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modular_arithmetic#Integers_modulo_n .

> > Any number within a modulo ring must be smaller than the modulo value given. E.g., $50 \mod{26} = 24$, because $50 - 26 = 24$.

Reviewer: Actually yes, but no. If you're working modulo a number, you can still use larger or smaller numbers. It's just convention (and useful for practical purposes) to choose the smallest non-negative value of a congruence class.

But in some PQ-crypto, it's also common to choose a value from a centered (i.e. µ=0) binomial distribution, yielding "positive" and "negative" numbers from a ring (Ternary LWE as a mathematical problem samples the secret and the error from `{-1, 0, 1}`, as an example).

> Remember calculating with remainders? Basically that. But kinda like the disk above, also forming a circle. The latin alphabet has 26 letters, no more, no less. And therefore, if you need to go before `A`, you go back to `Z` and continue your journey from there (and the other way around if you need to go beyond `Z`). So our `-2` becomes...? You guessed it, `Y`. With this little trick, we can reconstruct the original plain text: `CRYPTOGRAPHY`.

Reviewer: I think the typical clock-analogy is easier to grasp, as everyone calculates modulo 24 there.
